MAP: first draft (#50)
nesi/perf-training: _lessons/python-scatter/06-profiling_with_MAP.md

---
layout: post
title: Profiling_MAP
permalink: /python-scatter/profiling_MAP
chapter: python-scatter
---

## Objectives

Learn how to profile parallel codes using ARM MAP:

* learn how to use MAP
* visualise the profiling data
* interpret the profiling results

## Introduction to profiling parallel codes

> Profiling tools provide information about how much time is spend in different parts of your code in different threads/processes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parallel profiling tools provide information about how much time is spent in different parts of your code by different threads/processes.
```

There are 2 major ways to collect profiling data: *sampling* and *tracing*. Sampling is a statistical method. During run time the so called *stack trace* is analysed regularly. In contast to that tracing measures actual run time of instrumented parts with a well defined start and end. The data from all threads/processes are gathered and analysed. Thus we can not only see which part of the code is most time consuming, but also how this performs on different processes.

> Due to possible overhead (especially for tracing experiments) the program could run significantly slower than normal. Therefore it is generally advisable to first run a sampling experiments and choose a small representative test case to profile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to possible overhead (especially for tracing experiments) the program could run significantly slower than normal. Therefore it is generally advisable to first run a sampling experiment and choose a small representative test case to profile.
```

> ## profiling test case

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Profiling test case
```

The profiling case should be:
* representative, need to cover all features used during production

> * short in run time for fast turnaround, but long enough with sufficiently many data points (usually few minutes)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* short in run time for a fast turnaround, but long enough to be representative of the actual calculations you are going to run
```

* scaling effects can be investigated by comparing profiles small and big jobs

**Note:** keep in mind, that with shortened computation time, the initialisation and finalisation becomes more dominant.

## ARM MAP profiler

> On NeSI systems the [ARM MAP](https://www.arm.com/products/development-tools/server-and-hpc/forge/map) (previous Allinea MAP) profiler is provide as part of the `forge` module (beside the parallel debugger DDT).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On NeSI systems the [ARM MAP](https://www.arm.com/products/development-tools/server-and-hpc/forge/map) profiler is provided as part of the `forge` module (along with the parallel debugger, DDT).
```

> MAP is a commercial product, which can profile parallel, multi-threaded and single-threaded C/C++, Fortran and F90, as well as Pyhton codes. It can be used without code modification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MAP is a commercial product, which can profile parallel, multi-threaded and single-threaded C/C++, Fortran and F90, as well as Python codes. It can be used without code modification.
```

> MAP can be launched with a GUI and without. The GUI allows the user to navigate thru the code and enables to focus on specific source lines. The "Express Launch", without GIU enables easy usage of existing queue scripts and workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MAP can be launched with a GUI and without. The GUI allows the user to navigate through the code and enables them to focus on specific source lines. The "Express Launch", without GUI enables easy usage of existing queue scripts and workflows.
```

> For more details see [ARM MAP documentation](https://developer.arm.com/docs/101136/latest/map).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details see the [ARM MAP documentation](https://developer.arm.com/docs/101136/latest/map).
```

> In the following both, GUI and express launch are used with the scatter example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following, both GUI and express launch versions are used with the scatter example.
```

## Scatter MPI test case

We'll use the code in directory `mpi`. Start by

```
cd mpi
```

> The MPI version of scatter performs the default test case within short time (less than 20 seconds). We could argue that this could be to short. Thus, we increase the problem size:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MPI version of scatter performs the default test case within a short time (less than 20 seconds). We could argue that this is too short. Thus, we increase the problem size:
```

```
python scatter.py -c -nx 256 -ny 256 -nc 256
```

> ## using the "Express Launch"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using the "Express Launch"
```

> To use ARM MAP we need to load `module load forge` in our batch script and add `map --profile` in front of the parallel run statements. Thus, `srun`, its options as well as our executable and its arguments are passed to MAP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use ARM MAP we need to load `module load forge` in our batch script and add `map --profile` in front of the parallel run statements. Thus, `srun` and its options, as well as our executable and its arguments are passed to MAP.
```

Thus in the script we will have something like:

```
module load forge
map --profile srun python scatter.py -c
```

As a result some general information about the program run is printed to stdout from MAP as well as a file with the profiling information. This has the file ending `.map`. The results can be view by launching map with that file (see section [MAP Profile](#map-profile) ).

> ## using the graphical Interface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using the graphical Interface
```

The GUI can be started after loading `module load forge` and launching `map`.
[![ARM MAP main](images/ARM_MAP_main.png)](images/ARM_MAP_main.png)
In the profile menu we need to specify the executable (in this case `python`), the arguments (here `scatter.py -c`) and a working directory. Additional to that, we need to define the parallelisation parameters, e.g. one MPI process and 8 OMP threads.
[![ARM MAP main](images/ARM_MAP_run.png)](images/ARM_MAP_run.png)

> Furthermore, the "submit to queue" parameter need to be checked, for example the `--hint=nomultithreading` can be specified there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, the "submit to queue" parameter needs to be checked, for example the `--hint=nomultithread` can be specified there.
```

MAP can be launched with a GUI and without. The GUI allows the user to navigate through the code and enables them to focus on specific source lines. The "Express Launch", without GUI enables easy usage of existing queue scripts and workflows.

For more details see the [ARM MAP documentation](https://developer.arm.com/docs/101136/latest/map).

In the following, both GUI and express launch versions are used with the scatter example.

## Scatter MPI test case

We'll use the code in directory `mpi`. Start by

```
cd mpi
```

The MPI version of scatter performs the default test case within a short time (less than 20 seconds). We could argue that this is too short. Thus, we increase the problem size:
```
python scatter.py -c -nx 256 -ny 256 -nc 256
```
## Using the "Express Launch"

To use ARM MAP we need to load `module load forge` in our batch script and add `map --profile` in front of the parallel run statements. Thus, `srun` and its options, as well as our executable and its arguments are passed to MAP.
Thus in the script we will have something like:

```
module load forge

> map --profile srun python scatter.py -c

Reviewer: @mand35 should this be the increased problem size you mentioned just above?

```suggestion
map --profile srun python scatter.py -c -nx 256 -ny 256 -nc 256
```

Author: good point
